---
layout: default
title: Final Exam Notes
category: music100
tag: music100
---

Final Exam Notes

Beethoven:
- born in 1770, Germany
- Beethoven's master was Haydn
- clashed, Haydn was old-fashioned and Beethoven was rebellious
- in 1802 revealed he was going deaf

music:
1. crescendos that seem to carry the music forward
2. themes that sound exactly right but are played very quietly or very loud
3. dramatic use of classic structures
4. sudden key changes that fit powerful harmonic logic

symphony \#5
- dramatic sounds
- woodwinds and horns echo each other

contribution:
- longer symphonies that use more instruments than the Classical Period traditionally
- expanded the orchestra

## Romantic Period
- post French revolution
Reason						emotion, intuition
Objective						subjective
Formal						spontaneous
Universal						personal

- early 19th to beginning of 20th century
- development of modern industry
- growth of democratic governments and national pride
- increased emphasis on individual thoughts and feelings in the creative arts
- manipulate orchestral sounds, orchestration

Dynamics:
- Classic music doesn't go beyond piano and forte, romantic music has a much larger range
- more frequent changes and less predictable than music in earlier

Tempo:
- range of tempos increased
- more expressive descriptions

Melodies:
- longer melodies
- highly emotional
- expression of feeling, either intense and strong, others wistful, dreamy, or deeply sad

Harmony:
- expressive device
- modulation (movement among keys) is more frequent
- chromatic melodies and harmonies became much more frequent
- key ended in a different key in which they had begun

Form:
- less structure
- phrases tend to flow into each other rather than being separate

romantic differences from classical:

|               | romantic                                              | romantic                                                   |
|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| orchestra     | 25-30 players                                         | 60 or more                                                 |
| dynamic range | piano to forte                                        | triple piano to triple forte                               |
| tempo         | slow or fast                                          | greater extremes of tempo, also more changeable            |
| expression    | rarely indicated                                      | often indicated                                            |
| melody        | short, balanced                                       | longer, more variety                                       |
| harmony       | functional, serves to support the melody and the form | emotional: serves to express the deepest feelings in music |
| form          | fixed                                                 | flexible                                                   |

program music: tells some kind of story
absolute music: no meaning outside the meaning of the music itself

- opera and symphony were the most extensive genres
- voice was the central component of two Romantic genres song and the Requiem Mass
- concerto was a favoured orchestral genre
- chamber music was also popular in the nineteenth century

instruments:
- favourite instruments were the piano and the violin
- piano has intimacy and great drama, the violin has a wide range and potential for lyricism
- cello and the french horn wer able to express rich tenor range
- special effects, composers turned to the English horn (tenor oboe) for a reedy, evocative sound

romantic era:
- romantic songs may be either strophic or through-composed
- strophic songs are those that use the same music for each stanza
- through-composed songs are songs with music different in each stanza
- group of songs is called a song cycle

composers:
- Beethoven- franz schubert
- hector berlioz
- felix mendelssohn
- fryderyk chopin
- robert schumann
- clara schumann
- fanny mendelssohn hensel

virtuosi: talented person in arts
- schubert is different from beethoven, and met once
- beethoven was proud assertive, schubert was gentle, relaxed and lyrical

Rachmaninov Piano Concerto \#2
- flows with piano

MUSSORGSKY: Pictures at an Exhibition
- feeling rushed
- pictures come alive
- timpani used like signals
- careful movement is alluded to

TCHAIKOVSKY: Romeo and Juliet Fantasy Overture:
- regal beginning
- goes through the play of romeo and Juliet

An increased interest in program music.

An increased interest in national musics (folk song, dance, etc.). Not a contradiction - composers focussed on individual heritage, not a pan-European style (i.e., Bach, Handel, Vivaldi, Purcell, etc., wrote in essentially the same idiom). Exs. Tchaikovsky: PLAY 1812

Also an increased interest in exoticism: is a genre in which the rhythms, melodies, or instrumentation are designed to evoke the atmosphere of far-off lands or ancient times

 RIMSKY-KORSAKOV: Scheherazade
 The Sea and Sinbad's Ship
 - exotic
 - violin
 - sullen, but still prideful

DVORaK- New World
- exotic
- quieter and has more small sounds

Opera

In Romantic era:

opera (more “real” people and plots, comic “opera buffa” – inversion, lower classes get the upper hand)

Beethoven only wrote one opera - Fidelio

Virtuosity: Opera becomes show business. Star system, individual singers: Caruso, Jenny Lind (the "Swedish Nightingale"), right up to the three tenors (Pavarotti, Domingo, the other guy Carreras), Stratas, Joan Sutherland, Te Kenewa.

"Divas and prima donnas"
Vocal types: colouratura, mezzo soprano, alto, tenor, baritone, bass
Stereotypical roles: heroine - soprano, hero - tenor, alto - friend or "wicked stepmother," baritone, friend or villain, bass - villain
"Giantism" - huge orchestras, casts of thousands - see "Aida"

"bel canto" style (Italian) = "beautiful singing" Bellini, "Norma," Donizetti, "Lucia"

PUCCINI: La bohème from Che gelida manina:
- singing
- music accompaniment in the back
- french

PUCCINI: Turandot - Act III Scene 1: Nessun dorma:
- singing
- harp in the back


Nationalism - Operas on national themes with national styles (Russian ("Boris"), Italian (Verdi, "Rigoletto")

Exoticism - Verdi, "Aida," Puccini, "Madame Butterfly," "Girl of the Golden West," Bizet's "Carmen,"

Puccini, Madame Butterfly:
- singing
- female
- opera of a young japanese girl and the american navy lieutenant that leaves her pregnant

Above all, 19th C. opera is about melody.

Nationalism

Richard Wagner (1813-1883) (Yudkin 178-82)

Operas: Rienzi, Tannhauser, Flying Dutchman, Tristan and Isolde, Parsifal, Die Meistersinger, Lohengrin, "The Ring" - Das Rhinegold, Die Walkure, Siegfried, Gotterdammerung

born in Leipzig (Bach connection)
virtually self-taught in music, therefore not afraid to try "wrong" approaches.
pivotal figure (like Beethoven)--> bridge from Romanticism to most of the "isms" of the 20th C. --> "expressionism," "modernism," "impressionism,". . .
mostly known for operas and writings. . . no symphonies, little chamber music
has a difficult place in music history.

Comparison with Jean-Luc Goddard
W was a vicious anti-Semite
Until quite recently, was not played in Israel.
Hitler's favourite composer (though a little unfair since W died long before the rise of National Socialism).
Hitler's favourite because of W's subject matter.
DISCUSS: can we love the art but despise the artist (ex.: Miles Davis)?

W provided Germany with a mythological past. Germany was created in the 19th C. . . united principalities of Bavaria, Prussia, Saxony and others.
W took as his subject matter not German history but German/Northern European mythology. Deep well of myth and legend that runs from Scandinavian sagas and mythology through Beowulf and King Arthur. . . exactly the same well that Tolkien drew from in LOTR.
W's "Ring" (Rhinegold, Die Walkure, Siegfried, Gotterdamerung) bears many similarities to LOTR - a magic ring of power is forged in secret, mighty warriors, a last battle, the supernatural, a "sword that was broken" that is reforged. . .
Also to "Sleeping Beauty," and other north European fairy tales.

W's operas differ in many ways from the Italian grand opera tradition
"music drama" - continuous - no set pieces, huge orchestra

Wagner Bridal Chorus" from Lohengrin (Act III):
- here comes the bride
- merry and choir singing

pg. 194-195

2) More are familiar with the following: PLAY  (Act III – Vorspiel under “Elgar” as composer) "Ride of the Valkyries" from Die Walkure
- nationalistic, Wagner

wagner tristan:
- mysterious

Romantic (non-opera) Music Continued
Strophic
Through composed
song cycles - groups of songs on a related theme

Franz Schubert (bio pp.), songs, 9 symphonies (including 8 - "Unfinished"), ch. music.

PLAY   "Die Forelle" (text: Schubart) - (pp. 157-8)
- cyclical
- male singing voice with piano in the back

"Interiority"
Program music:
Nationalism/Exoticism

Chopin
Romantic characteristics: Dreamy, rubato. Titles like “Impromptu,” “Nocturne,”
PLAY  Chopin, Prelude in E Minor (pp.165)
- sole piano
- sadness

Innigkeit – dictionary def. = “poignant intimacy of feeling”
One of those useful German words for which there is no exact English equivalent.
(Zeitgeist etc)

Romantic artist as tortured soul (continued) Schumann, Berlioz,Tchaikovsky

PLAY/discuss Robert Schumann (1810-1856),  Dreaming (Traumerei)  (pp. 167)
- wistful
- sole piano
- melancholy

Madness and creativity – possible bipolar disorder?
Suicide attempt (1854), institutionalized, dead at 46.

PLAY C. Schumann Andante from Piano Trio Op. 17
- Trio
- calm and peaceful
- picks up in a part with a fast moving melody

Absolute Music
Brahms (1833-97), the 3rd "B"
4 symphonies, 4 concertos, a lot of piano music, much chamber music, some choral and vocal music.
we all know at least one piece of Brahms -
"Wiegenlied” “(Lullaby)"
a "romantic" personal life (see pp. 185 for complete bio)
studied w/ Schumann
Schumann had a nervous collapse - B fell in love w/ Schumann's wife, Clara (a fine composer and performer in her own right). B was torn by this situation.
S died but B did not set up housekeeping w/ C.
Though his personal life was "romantic" his music was controlled in a way that Tchaikovsky's, for example, was not.

only 4 symphonies. Didn't write a symphony until after 40. In the shadow of Beethoven ("clomping of giants")
PLAY   Brahms, "Symph. \#4, mvmt 4. (pp. 187)
- traditional romantic
- originality in the pieces with little repetition

Post-Romanticism
Influence of Wagner

Gustav Mahler (1860-1911)
conductor/composer
symphonies, Songs of the Earth
PLAY  Symphony #2: Urlicht (pp. 193)
- mysterious middle

Richard Strauss (1864-1949)

Tone Poems: Ein Heldenlieben, Death and Transfiguration, Also Sprach Zarathustra (PLAY ), Til Eulenspiegel, Don Quixote. . .

Operas: Electra, Salome, Der Rosenkavalier

extreme situations, chromatic harmony, precursor to expressionism

The XX Century


New Directions: the 20th Century
Overview
65 years: from first powered flight to moon landing.
Violent 1st half. . . 2 world wars ( 40 & 30 million dead respectively), Russian revolution
Technology/science explosion
More “isms” in 20th C than rest of music history combined.

Impressionism
Two big names: Debussy and Ravel
In visual art, impressionism was a (mostly French) reaction against "representation," Monet, Manet, Degas, Renoir
characterized by "blurriness," scenes of middle class and urban life (Monet: pg. 201)

Claude Debussy (1862-1918), piano music, orchestra music (but no symphonies). . . never liked the term "impressionism"
Paris Exposition of 1889

technical questions (demonstrate)

2 important developments: freer harmony and freer rhythm.
think of the "solid blocks" of functional harmony and form as equivalent to perspective in visual art.
emancipation of the dissonance - demonstrate, 9th, 11th, 13th chords, whole tone scale

D - art should be "sensuous" - pleasure

Importance of dance: 3 “scandalous” pieces: Prelude the A of an F, Bolero, Rite of Spring

PLAY  "Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun" (1894)
discuss opening phrase - the beginning of a new music, chromatic, ambiguous rhythm, sensuous.
- opening is movie-like
- opens up slowly

Primitivism, Stravinsky and the Birth of Modern Music
Igor Stravinsky (1882-1971)
Russian, student of Rimsky-Korsakov
3 ballets (note non-absolute music), "Firebird" (1910 ), "Petrushka" (1911), "The Rite of Spring" (1913)

PLAY “Firebird” ( (Kaschei), (conclusion))

PLAY “Petrushka”  – Tableau I “The Shrovetide Fair”
