---
layout: default
title: List of Propositions
category: math135
tag: math135
---

List Starting with GCD Propositions:

## GCD
The greatest common divisor of integers a and b,  
where a $$\ne$$ 0 or b $$\ne$$ 0, is an integer d $$\gt$$ 0 such that  
- d | a, d | b, and  
- for all c ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, if c | a and c \| b, then c $$\le$$ d

## GCD with Remainders (GCD WR)  
If a,b,q,r are integers such that  
a = qb+r, then gcd(a, b) = gcd(b, r)  

## GCD Characterization Theorem (GCD CT)  
Let a, b be integers, not both zero, and d ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$  
- If d | a and d | b,and  
- There exist x, y ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ such that d = ax+by  
Then d = gcd(a, b).  

## EEA (EEA Theorem (a.k.a Bezout’s Lemma))
Let a, b ∈ Z. Then d = gcd(a, b) can be computed, and there exist x , y ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$  
such that d = ax + by.   

## EEA shows converse of GCD CT is true
Let a, b ∈ Z, not both zero, and d ∈ N.  
If d = gcd(a, b)  
then  
- d | a and d | b  
- There exist x, y ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ such that d = ax+by.  

## GCD of One (GCD OO)  
Let a and b be integers.  
Then gcd(a, b) = 1  
if and only if there exist integers x and y with ax + by = 1.

## GCD DB (DB GCD))
Let a and b be integers.
If gcd(a, b) = d $$\ne$$ 0, then gcd( $$\frac{a}{d} , \frac{b}{d}$$ ) = 1.

## Coprime
We say integers a and b are coprime if and only if gcd(a, b) = 1.  

## Coprimes and Divisibility (CAD)
Let a, b, c ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$.
If c | ab and gcd( a , c ) = 1, then c | b.

## Primes
An integer p > 1 is said to be a prime if and only if the only positive divisors of p are 1 and p itself.  

## Primes and Divisibilty
Let p be a prime and a, b ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$.  
If p | (ab) then p | a or p | b.  

## (Infinitely Many Primes (INF P))
There are infinitely many primes.  

## (Prime Factorization (PF))
For every integer n > 1,  
n can be written as a product of primes.  

## Linear Diophantine Equation 1 (LDE1)  
Let a, b ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ and gcd(a, b) = d.  
The linear Diophantine equation ax + by = c has a solution iff d | c.  

## Linear Diophantine Equation 2 (LDE2)

Let gcd(a,b) = d where a $$\ne$$ 0 and b $$\ne$$ 0 are integers.  
If x = $$x_0$$ and y = $$y_0$$ is one particular integer solution to the linear diophantine equation ax + by = c,  
then the complete integer solution is
x = $$x_0$$ + $$\frac{b}{d}n$$, y = $$y_0$$−$$\frac{a}{d}n, ∀ n ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$

# Congruence
Let m be a fixed positive integer.  
If a, b ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ we say that a is congruent to b modulo m  
if and only if m | (a − b).

## Congruence is an Equivalent Relation
Let m ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$. Let a,b,c∈Z. Then
1. a ≡ a (mod m). **(reflexivity)**
2. a ≡ b (mod m)⇒ b ≡ a (mod m). **(symmetry)**
3. a ≡ b (mod m) and b ≡ c (mod m)⇒ a ≡ c (mod m). **(transitivity)**

## Unique Remainder
Let a ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ and m ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$.  
Then there exists a unique integer 0 ≤ r < m such that a ≡ r (mod m).

## Congruent If and Only If Remainder
Let m ∈ N, a, b ∈ Z.
Then a ≡ b (mod m) if and only if
a and b have the same remainder when divided by m.

## Properties of Modular Congruence
Let a,a′,b,b′ ∈Z. If a ≡ a′ (mod m)and b ≡ b′ (mod m), then  
1. a + b ≡ a′+ b′ (mod m)
2. a − b ≡ a′− b′ (mod m)
3. ab ≡ a′b′ (mod m)

## Congruence and Division
Let a,b,c ∈ Z, m ∈ N and c $$\ne$$ 0 (mod m).  
If ac ≡ bc (mod m) and gcd(c,m)=1,then a≡b (mod m).

## Linear Congruence
Given m ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$ and a,c ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, the relation ax ≡ c (mod m),  
where x is a variable, is called a linear congruence.  
We wish to find (i.e., solve for) all integer values of x  

### Brute Force vs. EEA:
Solve 5x ≡ 3 (mod 7).  
Exercise: can use CISR and trial and error to get $$x_0$$ = 2
and then PC to deduce x ≡ 2 (mod 7).  
Solution: Convert 5x ≡ 3 (mod 7) into the LDE 5x + 7y = 3. Use the EEA table to solve.  

## Linear Congruence Theorem Version 1 (LCT 1)  
Let gcd(a, m) = d $$\ne$$ 0.  
The linear congruence ax ≡ c (mod m) has a solution if
and only if d | c.  
Moreover, if x = $$x_0$$ is one particular solution, then the
complete solution is x ≡ $$x_0$$ (mod m)  

## Congruence Class  
Let a ∈ Z. Define  
[a] = {x ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ : x ≡ a (modm)}  
to be the congruence class of a modulo m.

### Arithmetic Operations for Congruence Classes
Given a, b ∈ Z, i.e., [a], [b] ∈ $$\mathbb{Z_m}$$,
- Addition: [a]+[b] = [a + b ]  
- Subtraction: [a] − [b] = [a − b]  
- Multiplication: [a] · [b] = [a · b].  
**We do not directly define division.**

## Linear Congruence Theorem, Version 2 (LCT 2)  
Let gcd(a, m) = d $$\ne$$ 0.  
The equation \[a\]\[x\] = [c] in $$\mathbb{Z_m}$$ has a solution if and only if d | c.  
Moreover, if [x] = [x0] is one particular solution, then the complete solution is  
{[$$x_0$$],[$$x_0$$ + m],[$$x_0$$ +2m],...,[$$x_0$$ +(d −1)\frac{m}{d}]}  

## Existence of Inverses
$$[a]^−1$$ exists in $$\mathbb{Z_m}$$ iff gcd(a, m) = 1  

The inverse of [a] in $$\mathbb{Z_m}$$ is unique (if it exists).  

## Fermat's Little Theorem (FLT)
If p is a prime number,a ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ and p $$\ne$$ a,  
then $$a^p−1$$ ≡ 1 (mod p).  

## Corollaries to FLT
If p is a prime number,and a ∈ Z,then $$a^p$$ ≡ a (mod p)

If p is a prime number and [a] $$\ne$$ [0] in $$\mathbb{Z_p}$$,  
then [a]^{−1} = [a^{p−2}].
