---
layout: default
title: Up to Chapter 5 Notes
category: engl109
tag: engl109
---

## Glossary of Terms
**Subject:** Who or what a setence is about. (**Biologists** often study animals.)  
**Verb:** The part of a setence that asserts something about a subject.(Biologists often **study** animals.)
**Noun:** A word that names a person, thing, quality, place, or idea.  
**Helping Verb:** A verb used with another verb to convey time, obligation, or other meaning. (**was** drilling, **would have been** drilling)  
**Passive Voice:** The verb form used when the subject names the receiver of the verb's action. (The house **was destroyed** by the tornado.)
**Active Voice:** The verb form used when the subject names the performer of the verb's action. (The tornado **destroyed** the house.)
**Main Clause:** A word group that can stand alone as a sentence, containing a subject, and a verb not beginning with a subordinating word. (The books were expensive)  
**Modifier:** A word or word group that describes another word or word group (**sweet** candy, running **in the park**)  
**Coordinating Conjunctions**: And, but, or, nor, and sometimes for, so , yet.  
**Conjunctive Adverbs:** Modifiers that describe the relation of the ideas in two cleauses such as hence, however, indeed, and thus.  
**Subordinate Clause:** A word group that contains a subject and a verb beginning with a subordinating word such as **because** or **who** and is not a question. (Words can do damage **when they hurt feelings.**)
**Phrase:** A word group that lacks a subject or verb or both. (Words can do damage **by hurting feelings.**)

# Chapter 3

## Emphasis

Subjects and verbs are underlined.  
Unemphatic:  
The __intention__ of the company __was__ to expand its workforce. A __proposal__ __was__ also __made__ to diversify the backgrounds and abilities of employees.  

Revised:  
The __company__ __intended__ to expand its workforce. __It__ also __proposed__ to diversify the backgrounds and abilities of employees.

| Unemphatic | Emphatic |
| was influential | influenced |
| is a glorification | glorifies |
| have a preference| prefer |
| had the appearance | appeared, seemed |
| made a claim | claimed|

## Using Sentence Beginnings and Endings
**Cumulative:** Sentence begins with a main clause and adds modifiers.

ex. Education has no equal in opening minds, instilling values, and creating opportunities

**Periodic:** Saves the main clause until just before the end of the sentence.

ex. In opening minds, instilling values, and creating opportunities, education has no equal.

**Subordination:** Indicate that some elements in a sentence are less important others for your meaning.
